instruction-material/bulk-rnaseq/02-tximport.md, before:

# tximport

_You can read more about how to use these instructions, including the `<YOUR USER NAME>` notation, in [this section of the fastp and Salmon instructions.](https://github.com/jaclyn-taroni/2025-mdibl-fair/blob/main/instruction-material/bulk-rnaseq/01-fastp-salmon.md#how-to-use-these-directions)_

<!-- START doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->
**Table of Contents**  *generated with [DocToc](https://github.com/thlorenz/doctoc)*

  - [Cooking show magic 🍳](#cooking-show-magic-)
  - [Running tximport](#running-tximport)
    - [Using `run-tximport.R`](#using-run-tximportr)
    - [How `run-tximport.R` works](#how-run-tximportr-works)
      - [Required libraries](#required-libraries)
      - [Command line options](#command-line-options)
      - [Files and directories](#files-and-directories)
      - [tximport](#tximport-1)
  - [Reading the tximport output into RStudio](#reading-the-tximport-output-into-rstudio)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

By design, we hide the contents of the [How `run-tximport.R` works](#how-run-tximportr-works) section to allow folks to concentrate on the steps to be taken during synchronous instruction.
This section explains what the code in `run-tximport.R` is doing and is intended to be helpful when revisiting this material.


## Cooking show magic 🍳

In the interest of time, we've created a "clean" version of the `tximport` output on the server that you can download with [`scp`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Secure_copy_protocol), which stands for secure copy protocol.

**In your local terminal** (⚠️ not when you are logged in to the server via `ssh`), run the following command replacing `<YOUR USER NAME>`, `<SERVER DOMAIN>`, and `<SOMEWHERE ON YOUR COMPUTER YOU WANT TO COPY THIS FILE TO>` with appropriate text (don't forget to remove the `<` and `>` when you replace the text!):

```sh
scp <YOUR USER NAME>@<SERVER DOMAIN>:/data/txi/goodale_data_tximport.RDS <SOMEWHERE ON YOUR COMPUTER YOU WANT TO COPY THIS FILE TO>
```

You will be prompted for your password, which you should type in and then hit enter.

We'll read this data into RStudio at the end of this module so we can inspect it together and prepare for upcoming modules.

_Just in case this doesn't work, there is another copy of this data available for download [here](https://github.com/jaclyn-taroni/2025-mdibl-fair/raw/main/setup/bulk-rnaseq/tximport/goodale_data_tximport.RDS)._


## Running tximport

In this exercise, we'll import transcript-level output from `salmon quant` and
summarize it to the gene-level using [`tximport`](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/tximport.html).
Gene-level abundance estimates have been demonstrated to be more accurate than transcript-level abundance estimates and differential expression analysis performed at the gene-level can be more robust and interpretable ([Soneson *et al.* 2015](http://dx.doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.7563.2)).
Depending on how the output of `tximport` is used, the approach can correct for potential changes in gene length across samples from differential isoform usage ([`tximport` vignette](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/tximport/inst/doc/tximport.html)).

For more information about `tximport`, see [this excellent vignette](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/tximport/inst/doc/tximport.html) from Love, Soneson, and Robinson.

### Using `run-tximport.R`

To run `tximport`, we need the `quant.sf` files for all the samples in an experiment and a file that maps between Ensembl transcript ids and Ensembl gene ids, which we've prepared ahead of time (see how [here](https://github.com/jaclyn-taroni/2025-mdibl-fair/blob/main/setup/bulk-rnaseq/scripts/prepare-tx2gene.R)) and put on the server.

**First, navigate back to the home directory that contains your own "personal" RNA-seq sample:**

```sh
cd ~
```

Then to run `tximport`, we'll use a script that's already on the server called `run-tximport.R`.
To make sure that everyone can write the `tximport` results to their own directory, we'll use command line arguments via a package called [`optparse`](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/optparse/index.html).

Specifically, `run-tximport.R` accepts two arguments:

* `--output_directory` which will be the absolute path of the directory on the server to save your output.
* `--output_filename` which will be the name of the `.RDS` file itself.

You can also use `--help` to see the help messages for these options like so:

```
Rscript /data/scripts/run-tximport.R --help
```

**Use the following command to run the Rscript that carries out the `tximport` steps**:

```sh
Rscript /data/scripts/run-tximport.R \
  --output_directory /data/<YOUR USER NAME>/tximport \
  --output_filename goodale_data_tximport.RDS
```

### How `run-tximport.R` works

<details>
<summary> <b><i>Expand this section for a walk through of what the different sections of the <code>run-tximport.R</code> script are accomplishing</b></i> 🚀 </summary>

Let's walk through what the different sections of the `run-tximport.R` script are accomplishing (you can view this script on GitHub [here](https://github.com/jaclyn-taroni/2025-mdibl-fair/tree/main/instruction-material/bulk-rnaseq/scripts-for-server/run-tximport.R)).

⚠️ _Do not copy and paste this R code into the command line_ ⚠️

#### Required libraries

The first thing the script does is load the required packages into the environment with `library()`.

```R
#### Required libraries --------------------------------------------------------

library(tximport)
library(optparse)
```

#### Command line options

This section is what is required for using the command line arguments via `optparse`.
`option_list` is the list of command line options we create with [`make_option()`](https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/optparse/versions/1.6.6/topics/make_option) from `optparse`, which we parse with [`parse_args()`](https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/optparse/versions/1.6.6/topics/parse_args).

Don't worry about this too much – the most important point is that by using a command line option in this script , rather than ["hard coding"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hard_coding) the output directory into the code itself, everyone in the course can use it for their purposes!

```r
#### Command line options ------------------------------------------------------

option_list <- list(
  make_option(
    opt_str = "--output_directory",
    type = "character",
    default = NULL,
    help = "A directory on the server where you can save your output, e.g., /data/<your username>/tximport",
  ),
  make_option(
    opt_str = "--output_filename",
    type = "character",
    default = "goodale_data_tximport.RDS",
    help = ".RDS to be saved in the directory specified by --output_directory",
  )
)

# Parse options
opt <- parse_args(OptionParser(option_list = option_list))
```

The last step in this section tells R to report an error (which will _stop_ the script from continuing to run) if you do not specify anything to `--output_directory`.
By default `opt$output_directory` will be `NULL` (as set via `make_option()` above), so the [`stop()`](https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/base/versions/3.6.2/topics/stop) in the [`if()`](http://applied-r.com/conditionals-in-r/#the-if-statement) statement will run if that argument is not used.

```R
# Error handling in case output directory is not specified
if (is.null(opt$output_directory)) {
  stop("You must specify where to save the tximport output with --output_directory!")
}

```

By placing this right after the command line options are parsed, we _fail early_ instead of waiting until we need to do something like write to file (which will required the output directory is specified!).
If we didn't fail early, we might waste time computing an object that we wouldn't be able to save as a file.

#### Files and directories

This code will create the directory, including parent folders (`recursive = TRUE`), specified by `--output_directory`.
Steps like this prevent the scripts from failing to write the output file in case someone forgot to create the directory ahead of time.

```r
#### Files & directories -------------------------------------------------------

# Create the output directory if it doesn't exist yet
dir.create(opt$output_directory, showWarnings = FALSE, recursive = TRUE)

```

We next save the full filename, complete with path, to a variable called `txi_file`.
[`file.path()`](https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/base/versions/3.6.2/topics/file.path) allows us to "paste" together the directory specified with `--output_directory` and the filename specified with `--output_filename`.

```r
# Set up output file path from options
txi_file <- file.path(opt$output_directory, opt$output_filename)
```

We need _everyone's_ "personal" Salmon quantification files to use `tximport`.
So, we'll list all the files in `/data` with the pattern `"quant.sf"` and assign their full paths to `salmon_files`.

```r
# List all quant files that folks processed
salmon_files <- list.files(path = "/data",
                           pattern = "quant.sf",
                           full.names = TRUE,
                           recursive = TRUE)

```

Then, just in case there are any _other_ `quant.sf` files on the server in `/data`, we'll filter to only the relevant files by detecting the pattern `workshop-*` in the file paths (`*` is a wildcard).

```r

# Make sure these are files in "personal" data directories
# Which are in `/data/workshop-*`
salmon_files <- salmon_files[grep("workshop-*", salmon_files)]

```

In the instructions for Salmon, everyone was asked to save their Salmon output in `/data/<USER NAME>/salmon/<SAMPLE IDENTIFIER>`.
The `quant.sf` will be in the `<SAMPLE IDENTIFIER>` directory, so the fifth element when we split by forward slashes (`/`) should be the sample identifier.

```r
# The sample identifier *should* always be the directory that contains the
# quant.sf file
split_salmon_paths <- strsplit(salmon_files, .Platform$file.sep)
sample_identifiers <- unlist(lapply(split_salmon_paths, function (x) x[[5]]))

# In case folks have the same starting set of samples, we need to make these IDs
# unique with `make.names()`.
# In an ideal scenario, we'd handle any duplicates, too. We have a clean
# version of this data to be used with exploratory data analysis and edgeR, so
# we'll keep it simple for this exercise.
names(salmon_files) <- make.names(sample_identifiers, unique = TRUE)
```

In addition to the `quant.sf` files, `tximport()` requires that you provide it with a data frame with 2 columns: the first column should include transcript identifiers that match what you used with Salmon (typically Ensembl transcript IDs) and the second should include gene identifiers you wish to summarize to (typically Ensembl gene IDs).
We prepped that ahead of time and saved it as `/data/index/Homo_sapiens/Homo_sapiens_Ensembl_v103_tx2gene.tsv` on the server.

```r
# Transcript to gene mapping (tx2gene) required for tximport step
tx2gene_file <- file.path("/data", "index", "Homo_sapiens",
                          "Homo_sapiens_Ensembl_v103_tx2gene.tsv")
```

#### tximport

We read in the transcript-to-gene tab-separated values file with `read.table()`.

```r
#### tximport ------------------------------------------------------------------

# Read in tx2gene TSV
tx2gene_df <- read.table(tx2gene_file, header = TRUE, sep = "\t")
```

If we were to look at the first few rows of `tx2gene_df` (using `head()`), here's what we would see:

>```r
> head(tx2gene_df)
># A tibble: 6 x 2
>  tx_id           gene_id
>  <chr>           <chr>
> 1 ENST00000387314 ENSG00000210049
> 2 ENST00000389680 ENSG00000211459
> 3 ENST00000387342 ENSG00000210077
> 4 ENST00000387347 ENSG00000210082
> 5 ENST00000612848 ENSG00000276345
> 6 ENST00000386347 ENSG00000209082
> ```

Now we pass all of the paths to the quantification files and the transcript-to-gene data frame to `tximport()`, which will import all of the quant files and summarize the values to the gene-level by default.
We use `countsFromAbundance = "no"` (the default) to import the estimated counts from Salmon.

Above, you may have noticed that `tx2gene_df` uses identifiers that don't include [Ensembl version information](https://useast.ensembl.org/Help/Faq?id=488).
Version numbers follow a period (`.`) at the end of the identifier.
For example, the second version of a human Ensembl transcript ID follows this pattern: `ENSTXXXXXXXXXX.2`.
The `quant.sf` files _do_ have version numbers, so we need to set `ignoreTxVersion = TRUE` for this to work!

```r
# tximport step
txi <- tximport(salmon_files,
                type = "salmon",
                tx2gene = tx2gene_df,
                countsFromAbundance = "no",
                ignoreTxVersion = TRUE)
```

Finally, we write to an RDS file with `saveRDS()`.
Recall that `txi_file` is created by "pasting" together the directory specified with `--output_directory` and the filename specified with `--output_filename`.

```r
# Save the tximport data as an RDS
saveRDS(txi, txi_file)
```

RDS is a special file format that we will cover in more detail below!

</details>


## Reading the tximport output into RStudio

Once we have the `goodale_data_tximport.RDS` file locally, we can read it into RStudio on our own computers.

The `.RDS` file extension indicates that this file is a single R object that we've stored and can restore by reading it into R and even use a different name ([ref](https://stat.ethz.ch/R-manual/R-devel/library/base/html/readRDS.html)).
This can be handy when we want to save an entire "specialized" R object, instead of flat tabular data – `tximport()` returns a _list_, rather than a matrix or data frame that we could easily save as a TSV or CSV file.

**Open up RStudio on your computer, and enter the following command in the [R Console](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/AlexsLemonade/training-modules/master/intro-to-R-tidyverse/screenshots/01-console.png)**; `<SOMEWHERE ON YOUR COMPUTER YOU WANT TO COPY THIS FILE TO>` should match the same location you used above with `scp` and don't forget to remove the `<` and `>` in your replacement!

```r
txi <- readr::read_rds("<SOMEWHERE ON YOUR COMPUTER YOU WANT TO COPY THIS FILE TO>")
```

**You can check what kind of object `txi` is with the following** (this, and all the commands that follow it, should be pasted or typed into the R Console):

```r
class(txi)
```

**Let's take a look at the first five rows and first five columns of the `counts` element of the `txi` object.**
This will be the estimated counts from Salmon.
We use the `$` operator extract this element of the list by _name_.
(You can use `help("$")` in the R Console to learn more!)

```r
txi$counts[1:5, 1:5]
```

Here's what it looks like (numbers may vary _slightly_):

> ```
>                 1_ATCACG_L001 13_AGTCAA_L001 17_ATCACG_L002 21_ACAGTG_L002 25_GATCAG_L002
> ENSG00000000003      3500.471       2879.608       2780.666       3200.377       2022.090
> ENSG00000000005         0.000          0.000          0.000          0.000          0.000
> ENSG00000000419       960.999        815.333        733.287        714.611        720.959
> ENSG00000000457       531.009        422.673        458.774        383.644        371.547
> ENSG00000000460       104.000         95.296        100.404         93.959        100.000
> ```

Our row names are human Ensembl gene IDs, which we can tell because they begin with `ENSG`.
This also tells us we have successfully summarized this data to the gene-level!
You can also see that these are not integers (as you may be conditioned to expect) but are instead decimal values, which stems from the procedure Salmon uses estimate the counts ([ref](https://github.com/COMBINE-lab/salmon/issues/437#issuecomment-751190682)).

**Let's do the same thing for the `abundance` element, which will be gene-level TPM:**

```r
txi$abundance[1:5, 1:5]
```

Example output:

>```
>                 1_ATCACG_L001 13_AGTCAA_L001 17_ATCACG_L002 21_ACAGTG_L002 25_GATCAG_L002
> ENSG00000000003    183.446388     126.629907     160.899071     154.345210     106.109780
> ENSG00000000005      0.000000       0.000000       0.000000       0.000000       0.000000
> ENSG00000000419    103.741267      73.789858      86.350549      69.230532      77.623139
> ENSG00000000457     11.453205       7.786352      11.667542       8.989396      10.214488
> ENSG00000000460      3.724108       3.127855       4.136371       3.168573       3.654559
> ```

The final elements in the `txi` list are the `length` matrix, which contains the effective lengths and can be used to generate an offset matrix for downstream gene-level differential expression analyses ([`tximport` vignette](https://bioconductor.org/packages/devel/bioc/vignettes/tximport/inst/doc/tximport.html#Salmon)), and `countsFromAbundance` which stores what  we used for the `countsFromAbundance` argument when we called `tximport()`.

Commit message:

Add note about only capturing `workshop-00`

instruction-material/bulk-rnaseq/02-tximport.md, after:

# tximport

_You can read more about how to use these instructions, including the `<YOUR USER NAME>` notation, in [this section of the fastp and Salmon instructions.](https://github.com/jaclyn-taroni/2025-mdibl-fair/blob/main/instruction-material/bulk-rnaseq/01-fastp-salmon.md#how-to-use-these-directions)_

<!-- START doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->
**Table of Contents**  *generated with [DocToc](https://github.com/thlorenz/doctoc)*

  - [Cooking show magic 🍳](#cooking-show-magic-)
  - [Running tximport](#running-tximport)
    - [Using `run-tximport.R`](#using-run-tximportr)
    - [How `run-tximport.R` works](#how-run-tximportr-works)
      - [Required libraries](#required-libraries)
      - [Command line options](#command-line-options)
      - [Files and directories](#files-and-directories)
      - [tximport](#tximport-1)
  - [Reading the tximport output into RStudio](#reading-the-tximport-output-into-rstudio)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

By design, we hide the contents of the [How `run-tximport.R` works](#how-run-tximportr-works) section to allow folks to concentrate on the steps to be taken during synchronous instruction.
This section explains what the code in `run-tximport.R` is doing and is intended to be helpful when revisiting this material.


## Cooking show magic 🍳

In the interest of time, we've created a "clean" version of the `tximport` output on the server that you can download with [`scp`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Secure_copy_protocol), which stands for secure copy protocol.

**In your local terminal** (⚠️ not when you are logged in to the server via `ssh`), run the following command replacing `<YOUR USER NAME>`, `<SERVER DOMAIN>`, and `<SOMEWHERE ON YOUR COMPUTER YOU WANT TO COPY THIS FILE TO>` with appropriate text (don't forget to remove the `<` and `>` when you replace the text!):

```sh
scp <YOUR USER NAME>@<SERVER DOMAIN>:/data/txi/goodale_data_tximport.RDS <SOMEWHERE ON YOUR COMPUTER YOU WANT TO COPY THIS FILE TO>
```

You will be prompted for your password, which you should type in and then hit enter.

We'll read this data into RStudio at the end of this module so we can inspect it together and prepare for upcoming modules.

_Just in case this doesn't work, there is another copy of this data available for download [here](https://github.com/jaclyn-taroni/2025-mdibl-fair/raw/main/setup/bulk-rnaseq/tximport/goodale_data_tximport.RDS)._


## Running tximport

In this exercise, we'll import transcript-level output from `salmon quant` and
summarize it to the gene-level using [`tximport`](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/tximport.html).
Gene-level abundance estimates have been demonstrated to be more accurate than transcript-level abundance estimates and differential expression analysis performed at the gene-level can be more robust and interpretable ([Soneson *et al.* 2015](http://dx.doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.7563.2)).
Depending on how the output of `tximport` is used, the approach can correct for potential changes in gene length across samples from differential isoform usage ([`tximport` vignette](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/tximport/inst/doc/tximport.html)).

For more information about `tximport`, see [this excellent vignette](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/tximport/inst/doc/tximport.html) from Love, Soneson, and Robinson.

### Using `run-tximport.R`

To run `tximport`, we need the `quant.sf` files for all the samples in an experiment and a file that maps between Ensembl transcript ids and Ensembl gene ids, which we've prepared ahead of time (see how [here](https://github.com/jaclyn-taroni/2025-mdibl-fair/blob/main/setup/bulk-rnaseq/scripts/prepare-tx2gene.R)) and put on the server.

**First, navigate back to the home directory that contains your own "personal" RNA-seq sample:**

```sh
cd ~
```

Then to run `tximport`, we'll use a script that's already on the server called `run-tximport.R`.
To make sure that everyone can write the `tximport` results to their own directory, we'll use command line arguments via a package called [`optparse`](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/optparse/index.html).

Specifically, `run-tximport.R` accepts two arguments:

* `--output_directory` which will be the absolute path of the directory on the server to save your output.
* `--output_filename` which will be the name of the `.RDS` file itself.

You can also use `--help` to see the help messages for these options like so:

```
Rscript /data/scripts/run-tximport.R --help
```

**Use the following command to run the Rscript that carries out the `tximport` steps**:

```sh
Rscript /data/scripts/run-tximport.R \
  --output_directory /data/<YOUR USER NAME>/tximport \
  --output_filename goodale_data_tximport.RDS
```

### How `run-tximport.R` works

<details>
<summary> <b><i>Expand this section for a walk through of what the different sections of the <code>run-tximport.R</code> script are accomplishing</b></i> 🚀 </summary>

Let's walk through what the different sections of the `run-tximport.R` script are accomplishing (you can view this script on GitHub [here](https://github.com/jaclyn-taroni/2025-mdibl-fair/tree/main/instruction-material/bulk-rnaseq/scripts-for-server/run-tximport.R)).

⚠️ _Do not copy and paste this R code into the command line_ ⚠️

#### Required libraries

The first thing the script does is load the required packages into the environment with `library()`.

```R
#### Required libraries --------------------------------------------------------

library(tximport)
library(optparse)
```

#### Command line options

This section is what is required for using the command line arguments via `optparse`.
`option_list` is the list of command line options we create with [`make_option()`](https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/optparse/versions/1.6.6/topics/make_option) from `optparse`, which we parse with [`parse_args()`](https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/optparse/versions/1.6.6/topics/parse_args).

Don't worry about this too much – the most important point is that by using a command line option in this script , rather than ["hard coding"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hard_coding) the output directory into the code itself, everyone in the course can use it for their purposes!

```r
#### Command line options ------------------------------------------------------

option_list <- list(
  make_option(
    opt_str = "--output_directory",
    type = "character",
    default = NULL,
    help = "A directory on the server where you can save your output, e.g., /data/<your username>/tximport",
  ),
  make_option(
    opt_str = "--output_filename",
    type = "character",
    default = "goodale_data_tximport.RDS",
    help = ".RDS to be saved in the directory specified by --output_directory",
  )
)

# Parse options
opt <- parse_args(OptionParser(option_list = option_list))
```

The last step in this section tells R to report an error (which will _stop_ the script from continuing to run) if you do not specify anything to `--output_directory`.
By default `opt$output_directory` will be `NULL` (as set via `make_option()` above), so the [`stop()`](https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/base/versions/3.6.2/topics/stop) in the [`if()`](http://applied-r.com/conditionals-in-r/#the-if-statement) statement will run if that argument is not used.

```R
# Error handling in case output directory is not specified
if (is.null(opt$output_directory)) {
  stop("You must specify where to save the tximport output with --output_directory!")
}

```

By placing this right after the command line options are parsed, we _fail early_ instead of waiting until we need to do something like write to file (which will required the output directory is specified!).
If we didn't fail early, we might waste time computing an object that we wouldn't be able to save as a file.

#### Files and directories

This code will create the directory, including parent folders (`recursive = TRUE`), specified by `--output_directory`.
Steps like this prevent the scripts from failing to write the output file in case someone forgot to create the directory ahead of time.

```r
#### Files & directories -------------------------------------------------------

# Create the output directory if it doesn't exist yet
dir.create(opt$output_directory, showWarnings = FALSE, recursive = TRUE)

```

We next save the full filename, complete with path, to a variable called `txi_file`.
[`file.path()`](https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/base/versions/3.6.2/topics/file.path) allows us to "paste" together the directory specified with `--output_directory` and the filename specified with `--output_filename`.

```r
# Set up output file path from options
txi_file <- file.path(opt$output_directory, opt$output_filename)
```

We need _everyone's_ "personal" Salmon quantification files to use `tximport`.
So, we'll list all the files in `/data` with the pattern `"quant.sf"` and assign their full paths to `salmon_files`.

```r
# List all quant files that folks processed
salmon_files <- list.files(path = "/data",
                           pattern = "quant.sf",
                           full.names = TRUE,
                           recursive = TRUE)

```

Then, just in case there are any _other_ `quant.sf` files on the server in `/data`, we'll filter to only the relevant files by detecting the pattern `workshop-*` in the file paths (`*` is a wildcard).
Because of the way the directories are set up this year, this will only find the "cooking show magic" `quant.sf` files in `workshop-00`.

```r

# Make sure these are files in "personal" data directories
# Which are in `/data/workshop-*`
salmon_files <- salmon_files[grep("workshop-*", salmon_files)]

```

In the instructions for Salmon, everyone was asked to save their Salmon output in `/data/<USER NAME>/salmon/<SAMPLE IDENTIFIER>`.
The `quant.sf` will be in the `<SAMPLE IDENTIFIER>` directory, so the fifth element when we split by forward slashes (`/`) should be the sample identifier.

```r
# The sample identifier *should* always be the directory that contains the
# quant.sf file
split_salmon_paths <- strsplit(salmon_files, .Platform$file.sep)
sample_identifiers <- unlist(lapply(split_salmon_paths, function (x) x[[5]]))

# In case folks have the same starting set of samples, we need to make these IDs
# unique with `make.names()`.
# In an ideal scenario, we'd handle any duplicates, too. We have a clean
# version of this data to be used with exploratory data analysis and edgeR, so
# we'll keep it simple for this exercise.
names(salmon_files) <- make.names(sample_identifiers, unique = TRUE)
```

In addition to the `quant.sf` files, `tximport()` requires that you provide it with a data frame with 2 columns: the first column should include transcript identifiers that match what you used with Salmon (typically Ensembl transcript IDs) and the second should include gene identifiers you wish to summarize to (typically Ensembl gene IDs).
We prepped that ahead of time and saved it as `/data/index/Homo_sapiens/Homo_sapiens_Ensembl_v103_tx2gene.tsv` on the server.

```r
# Transcript to gene mapping (tx2gene) required for tximport step
tx2gene_file <- file.path("/data", "index", "Homo_sapiens",
                          "Homo_sapiens_Ensembl_v103_tx2gene.tsv")
```

#### tximport

We read in the transcript-to-gene tab-separated values file with `read.table()`.

```r
#### tximport ------------------------------------------------------------------

# Read in tx2gene TSV
tx2gene_df <- read.table(tx2gene_file, header = TRUE, sep = "\t")
```

If we were to look at the first few rows of `tx2gene_df` (using `head()`), here's what we would see:

>```r
> head(tx2gene_df)
># A tibble: 6 x 2
>  tx_id           gene_id
>  <chr>           <chr>
> 1 ENST00000387314 ENSG00000210049
> 2 ENST00000389680 ENSG00000211459
> 3 ENST00000387342 ENSG00000210077
> 4 ENST00000387347 ENSG00000210082
> 5 ENST00000612848 ENSG00000276345
> 6 ENST00000386347 ENSG00000209082
> ```

Now we pass all of the paths to the quantification files and the transcript-to-gene data frame to `tximport()`, which will import all of the quant files and summarize the values to the gene-level by default.
We use `countsFromAbundance = "no"` (the default) to import the estimated counts from Salmon.

Above, you may have noticed that `tx2gene_df` uses identifiers that don't include [Ensembl version information](https://useast.ensembl.org/Help/Faq?id=488).
Version numbers follow a period (`.`) at the end of the identifier.
For example, the second version of a human Ensembl transcript ID follows this pattern: `ENSTXXXXXXXXXX.2`.
The `quant.sf` files _do_ have version numbers, so we need to set `ignoreTxVersion = TRUE` for this to work!

```r
# tximport step
txi <- tximport(salmon_files,
                type = "salmon",
                tx2gene = tx2gene_df,
                countsFromAbundance = "no",
                ignoreTxVersion = TRUE)
```

Finally, we write to an RDS file with `saveRDS()`.
Recall that `txi_file` is created by "pasting" together the directory specified with `--output_directory` and the filename specified with `--output_filename`.

```r
# Save the tximport data as an RDS
saveRDS(txi, txi_file)
```

RDS is a special file format that we will cover in more detail below!

</details>


## Reading the tximport output into RStudio

Once we have the `goodale_data_tximport.RDS` file locally, we can read it into RStudio on our own computers.

The `.RDS` file extension indicates that this file is a single R object that we've stored and can restore by reading it into R and even use a different name ([ref](https://stat.ethz.ch/R-manual/R-devel/library/base/html/readRDS.html)).
This can be handy when we want to save an entire "specialized" R object, instead of flat tabular data – `tximport()` returns a _list_, rather than a matrix or data frame that we could easily save as a TSV or CSV file.

**Open up RStudio on your computer, and enter the following command in the [R Console](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/AlexsLemonade/training-modules/master/intro-to-R-tidyverse/screenshots/01-console.png)**; `<SOMEWHERE ON YOUR COMPUTER YOU WANT TO COPY THIS FILE TO>` should match the same location you used above with `scp` and don't forget to remove the `<` and `>` in your replacement!

```r
txi <- readr::read_rds("<SOMEWHERE ON YOUR COMPUTER YOU WANT TO COPY THIS FILE TO>")
```

**You can check what kind of object `txi` is with the following** (this, and all the commands that follow it, should be pasted or typed into the R Console):

```r
class(txi)
```

**Let's take a look at the first five rows and first five columns of the `counts` element of the `txi` object.**
This will be the estimated counts from Salmon.
We use the `$` operator extract this element of the list by _name_.
(You can use `help("$")` in the R Console to learn more!)

```r
txi$counts[1:5, 1:5]
```

Here's what it looks like (numbers may vary _slightly_):

> ```
>                 1_ATCACG_L001 13_AGTCAA_L001 17_ATCACG_L002 21_ACAGTG_L002 25_GATCAG_L002
> ENSG00000000003      3500.471       2879.608       2780.666       3200.377       2022.090
> ENSG00000000005         0.000          0.000          0.000          0.000          0.000
> ENSG00000000419       960.999        815.333        733.287        714.611        720.959
> ENSG00000000457       531.009        422.673        458.774        383.644        371.547
> ENSG00000000460       104.000         95.296        100.404         93.959        100.000
> ```

Our row names are human Ensembl gene IDs, which we can tell because they begin with `ENSG`.
This also tells us we have successfully summarized this data to the gene-level!
You can also see that these are not integers (as you may be conditioned to expect) but are instead decimal values, which stems from the procedure Salmon uses estimate the counts ([ref](https://github.com/COMBINE-lab/salmon/issues/437#issuecomment-751190682)).

**Let's do the same thing for the `abundance` element, which will be gene-level TPM:**

```r
txi$abundance[1:5, 1:5]
```

Example output:

>```
>                 1_ATCACG_L001 13_AGTCAA_L001 17_ATCACG_L002 21_ACAGTG_L002 25_GATCAG_L002
> ENSG00000000003    183.446388     126.629907     160.899071     154.345210     106.109780
> ENSG00000000005      0.000000       0.000000       0.000000       0.000000       0.000000
> ENSG00000000419    103.741267      73.789858      86.350549      69.230532      77.623139
> ENSG00000000457     11.453205       7.786352      11.667542       8.989396      10.214488
> ENSG00000000460      3.724108       3.127855       4.136371       3.168573       3.654559
> ```

The final elements in the `txi` list are the `length` matrix, which contains the effective lengths and can be used to generate an offset matrix for downstream gene-level differential expression analyses ([`tximport` vignette](https://bioconductor.org/packages/devel/bioc/vignettes/tximport/inst/doc/tximport.html#Salmon)), and `countsFromAbundance` which stores what  we used for the `countsFromAbundance` argument when we called `tximport()`.
